There be some sports arepainful, and their labour
Delight in them sets off:some kinds of baseness
Are nobly undergone andmost poor matters
Point to rich ends.
This my mean task
Would be as heavy to me asodious, but
The mistress which I servequickens what's dead
And makes my labourspleasures: O, she is
Ten times more gentle thanher father's crabbed,
And he's composed ofharshness.
I must remove
Some thousands of theselogs and pile them up,
Upon a sore injunction: mysweet mistress
Weeps when she sees me work,and says, such baseness
Had never like executor.
I forget:
But these sweet thoughts doeven refresh my labours,
Most busy lest, when I doit.
Alas, now, pray you,
Work not so hard: I wouldthe lightning had
Burnt up these logs thatyou are enjoin'd to pile.
Pray, set it down and restyou: when this burns,
'Twill weep for havingwearied you.
My father
Is hard at study; praynow, rest yourself;
He's safe these threehours.
O most dear mistress,
The sun will set before Ishall discharge
What I must strive to do.
If you'll sit down,
I'll bear your logs thewhile: pray, give me that;
I'll carry it to the pile.
No, precious creature;
I had rather crack mysinews, break my back,
Than you should suchdishonour undergo,
While I sit lazy by.
It would become me
As well as it does you:and I should do it
With much more ease; formy good will is to it,
And yours it is against.
Poor worm, thou artinfected.
This visitation shows it.
You look wearily.
No, noble mistress; 'tisfresh morning with me
When you are by at night.
I do beseech you--
Chiefly that I might setit in my prayers--
What is your name?
Miranda--
O my father, I have brokeyour hest to say so.
Admired Miranda.
Indeed the top ofadmiration.
Worth what's dearest tothe world.
Full many a lady I haveeyed with best regard andmany a time
The harmony of theirtongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligentear:
for several virtues
Have I liked severalwomen; never any
With so full soul, butsome defect in her
Did quarrel with thenoblest grace she owed
And put it to the foil:but you, O you,
So perfect and sopeerless, are created
Of every creature's best.
I do not know
One of my sex; no woman'sface remember,
Save, from my glass, mineown; nor have I seen
More that I may call menthan you, good friend,
And my dear father: howfeatures are abroad,
I am skilless of; but, bymy modesty,
The jewel in my dower, Iwould not wish
Any companion in the worldbut you,
Nor can imagination form ashape,
Besides yourself, to likeof.
But I prattle
Something too wildly andmy father's precepts
I therein do forget.
I am in my condition
A prince, Miranda; I dothink, a king;
I would, not so-- andwould no more endure
This wooden slavery thanto suffer
The flesh-fly blow mymouth.
Hear my soul speak:
The very instant that Isaw you, did
My heart fly to yourservice; there resides,
To make me slave to it;and for your sake
Am I this patient log-man.
Do you love me?
O heaven, O earth, bearwitness to this sound
And crown what I professwith kind event
If I speak true.
If hollowly, invert
What best is boded me tomischief.
I beyond all limit of whatelse i' the world
Do love, prize, honouryou.
Oh.
I am a fool
To weep at what I am gladof.
Fair encounter
Of two most rareaffections.
Heavens rain grace
On that which breedsbetween 'em.
Wherefore weep you?
At my unworthiness thatdare not offer
What I desire to give, andmuch less take
What I shall die to want.
But this is trifling;
And all the more it seeksto hide itself,
The bigger bulk it shows.
Hence, bashful cunning.
And prompt me, plain andholy innocence.
I am your wife, if youwill marry me;
If not, I'll die yourmaid: to be your fellow
You may deny me; but I'llbe your servant,
Whether you will or no.
My mistress, dearest;
And I thus humble ever.
My husband, then?
Ay, with a heart aswilling
As bondage e'er offreedom: here's my hand.
And mine, with my heartin't;
and now farewell Till halfan hour hence.
A thousand thousand.
So glad of this as they Icannot be,
Who are surprised withal;my rejoicing
At nothing can be more.
I'll to my book,
For yet ere supper-timemust I perform
Much businessappertaining.
Tell not me; when the buttis out,
we will drink water; not adrop before:
therefore bear up, andboard 'em.
Servant-monster, drink tome.
Servant-monster.
The folly of this island.
They say there's but fiveupon this isle:
we are three of them; ifth' other two
be brained like us, thestate totters.
Drink, servant-monster,when I bid thee:
thy eyes are almost set inthy head.
Where should they be setelse?
He were a brave monsterindeed, if they were setin his tail.
My man-monster hathdrown'd his tongue insack:
for my part, the seacannot drown me;
I swam, ere I couldrecover the shore,
five and thirty leagues...
Ha!
Off and on.
By this light, thou shaltbe my lieutenant, monster,
or my standard.
Your lieutenant, if youlist; he's no standard.
We'll not run, MonsieurMonster.
Nor go neither; but you'lllie like dogs
and yet say nothingneither.
Moon-calf, speak once inthy life,
if thou beest a goodmoon-calf.
How does thy honour?
Let me lick thy shoe.
I'll not serve him; he isnot valiant.
Thou liest, most ignorantmonster:
I am in case to justle aconstable.
Why, thou deboshed fish thou,was there ever man a coward
that hath drunk so muchsack as I to-day?
Wilt thou tell a monstrouslie,
being but half a fish andhalf a monster?
Lo, how he mocks me!
Wilt thou let him, mylord?
"Lord" quoth he.
That a monster should besuch a natural.
Lo, lo, again!
Bite him to death, Iprithee.
Trinculo, keep a goodtongue in your head:
if you prove a mutineer,the next tree.
The poor monster's mysubject
and he shall not sufferindignity.
I thank my noble lord.
Wilt thou be pleased tohearken
to the suit I made tothee?
Marry, will I; kneel andrepeat it;
I will stand, and so shallTrinculo.
As I told thee before,
I am subject to a tyrant,a sorcerer,
that by his cunning hathcheated me of the island.
Thou liest.
Thou liest, thou jestingmonkey, thou:
I would my valiant masterwould destroy thee!
I do not lie!
Trinculo, if you troublehim any more in's tale,
by this hand, I willsupplant some of your teeth.
Well, I said nothing.
Mum, then, and no more.
Proceed.
I say, by sorcery he gotthis isle;
From me he got it.
If thy greatness will
Revenge it on him-- for Iknow thou darest,
But this thing dare not.
That's most certain.
Thou shalt be lord of itand I'll serve thee.
How now shall this becompassed?
Canst thou bring me to theparty?
Yea, yea, my lord: I'llyield him thee asleep,
Where thou mayst knock anail into his head.
Thou liest; thou canstnot.
What a pied ninny's this!
Thou scurvy patch!
I do beseech thygreatness, give him blows
And take his bottle fromhim: when that's gone
He shall drink nought butbrine; for I'll not show him
Where the quick freshesare.
Trinculo, run into nofurther danger:
interrupt the monster oneword further,
and, by this hand, I'llturn my mercy out o' doors
and make a stock-fish ofthee.
Why, what did I?
I did nothing.
I'll go farther off.
Didst thou not say helied?
Thou liest.
Do I so?
Take thou that.
As you like this, give methe lie another time.
I did not give the lie.
Out o' your wits andhearing too?
A pox o' your bottle!
This can sack and drinkingdo.
A murrain on your monster, andthe devil take your fingers!
Now, forward with yourtale.
Prithee, stand fartheroff.
Beat him enough:
after a little time I'llbeat him too.
Stand farther.
Come, proceed.
Why, as I told thee, 'tisa custom with him,
I' th' afternoon to sleep:there thou mayst brain him,
Having first seized hisbooks, or with a log
Batter his skull, orpaunch him with a stake,
Or cut his wezand with thyknife.
Remember first to possesshis books; for without them
He's but a sot, as I am,nor hath not
One spirit to command:they all do hate him
As rootedly as I.
Burn but his books.
He has brave utensils--for so he calls them--
Which when he has a house,he'll deck withal
And that most deeply toconsider is
The beauty of hisdaughter; he himself
Calls her a nonpareil: Inever saw a woman,
But only Sycorax my damand she;
But she as far surpassethSycorax
As great'st does least.
Is it so brave a lass?
Ay, lord; she will becomethy bed, I warrant.
And bring thee forth bravebrood.
Monster, I will kill thisman:
his daughter and I will beking and queen--
save our graces--
and Trinculo and thyselfshall be viceroys.
Dost thou like the plot,Trinculo?
Excellent.
Give me thy hand: I amsorry I beat thee;
but, while thou livest, keepa good tongue in thy head.
Within this half hour willhe be asleep:
Wilt thou destroy himthen?
Ay, on mine honour.
This will I tell mymaster.
Thou makest me merry; I amfull of pleasure:
Let us be jocund: will youtroll the catch
You taught me butwhile-ere?
At thy request, monster, Iwill do reason, any reason.
Come on, Trinculo, let ussing.
Flout 'em and scout 'em
And scout 'em and flout'em.
Thought is free.
That's not the tune!
What is this same?
Shh!
This is the tune of ourcatch, played by thepicture of Nobody.
If thou beest a man, showthyself in thy likeness:
if thou beest a devil,take't as thou list.
O, forgive me my sins!
He that dies pays alldebts: I defy thee!
Mercy upon us.
Art thou afeard?
No, monster, not I.
Be not afeard; the isle isfull of noises,
Sounds and sweet airs, thatgive delight and hurt not.
Sometimes a thousandtwangling instruments
Will hum about mine ears,and sometime voices
That, if I then had wakedafter long sleep,
Will make me sleep again:and then, in dreaming,
The clouds methought wouldopen and show riches
Ready to drop upon methat, when I waked,
I cried to dream again.
This will prove a bravekingdom to me,
where I shall have mymusic for nothing.
When Prospero isdestroyed.
That shall be by and by: Iremember the story.
The sound is going away;
let's follow it, and afterdo our work.
Lead, monster; we'llfollow.
I would I could see thistabourer; he lays it on.
Wilt come?
I'll follow, Stephano.
By'r lakin, I can go nofurther, sir;
My old bones ache: here'sa maze trod indeed
Through forth-rights andmeanders.
By your patience, I needsmust rest me.
Old lord, I cannot blamethee,
Who am myself attach'dwith weariness,
To the dulling of myspirits: sit down, and rest.
Even here will I put offmy hope and keep it
No longer for myflatterer.
He is drown'd
Whom thus we stray tofind, and the sea mocks
Our frustrate search onland.
Well, let him go.
I am right glad that he'sso out of hope.
Do not, for one repulse,forego the purpose
You resolved to effect.
The next advantage will wetake throughly.
Let it be to-night;
For, now they are oppress'dwith travel, they
Will not, nor cannot, usesuch vigilance
As when they are fresh.
I say, to-night: no more.
What harmony is this?
My good friends, hark.
Marvellous sweet music.
Give us kind keepers,heavens.
What were these?
A living drollery.
Now I will believe
That there are unicorns,that in Arabia
There is one tree, thephoenix' throne, one phoenix
At this hour reigningthere.
I'll believe both;
And what does else wantcredit, come to me,
And I'll be sworn 'tis true:travellers ne'er did lie,
Though fools at homecondemn 'em.
If in Naples I shouldreport this now,
would they believe me?
If I should say, I sawsuch islanders--
For, certes, these arepeople of the island--
Who, though they are ofmonstrous shape, yet, note,
Their manners are moregentle-kind than of
Our human generation youshall find
Many, nay, almost any.
Honest lord,
Thou hast said well; forsome of you there present
Are worse than devils.
I cannot too much muse
Such shapes, such gestureand such sounds, expressing,
Although they want the useof tongue, a kind
Of excellent dumbdiscourse.
Praise in departing.
They vanish'd strangely.
No matter, since
They have left theirviands behind;
for we have stomachs.
Will't please you taste ofwhat is here?
Not I.
Faith, sir, you need notfear.
When we were boys,
Who would believe thatthere were mountaineers
Dew-lapp'd like bulls,whose throats had hangingat 'em
Wallets of flesh?
Or that there were suchmen
Whose heads stood in theirbreasts?
Which now we find
Each putter-out of fivefor one will bring us
Good warrant of.
I will stand to and feed,
Although my last: nomatter, since I feel
The best is past.
Brother, my lord the duke,
Stand to and do as we.
You are three men of sin,whom Destiny,
That hath to instrumentthis lower world
And what is in't, thenever-surfeited sea
Hath caused to belch upyou; and on this island
Where man doth notinhabit; you 'mongst men
Being most unfit to live.
I have made you mad;
And even with such-likevalour men hang and drown
Their proper selves.
You fools!
I and my fellows
Are ministers of Fate: theelements,
Of whom your swords aretemper'd, may as well
Wound the loud winds, orwith bemock'd-at stabs
Kill the still-closingwaters, as diminish
One dowle that's in myplume: my fellow-ministers
Are like invulnerable.
If you could hurt,
Your swords are now toomassy for your strengths
And will not be uplifted.
But remember--
For that's my business toyou-- that you three
From Milan did supplantgood Prospero;
Exposed unto the sea,which hath requit it,
Him and his innocentchild: for which foul deed
The powers, delaying, notforgetting, have
Incensed the seas and shores,yea, all the creatures,
Against your peace!
Thee of thy son, Alonso,
They have bereft; and dopronounce by me:
Lingering perdition, worsethan any death
Can be at once, shall stepby step attend
You and your ways; whosewraths to guard you from--
Which here, in this mostdesolate isle, else falls
Upon your heads-- isnothing but heart-sorrow
And a clear life ensuing.
I' the name of somethingholy, sir, why stand you
In this strange stare?
O, it is monstrous,monstrous:
Methought the billowsspoke and told me of it;
The winds did sing it tome, and the thunder,
That deep and dreadfulorgan-pipe, pronounced
The name of Prosper: itdid bass my trespass.
Therefore my son i' theooze is bedded,
and I'll seek him deeperthan e'er plummet sounded
And with him there liemudded.
But one fiend at a time, I'llfight their legions o'er.
I'll be thy second.
All three of them aredesperate: their great guilt,
Like poison given to worka great time after,
Now 'gins to bite thespirits.
I do beseech you
That are of suppler joints,follow them swiftly
And hinder them from whatthis ecstasy
May now provoke them to.
Follow, I pray you.
Bravely the figure of thisharpy hast thou
Perform'd, my Ariel; agrace it had, devouring:
Of my instructions hastthou nothing bated
In what thou hadst to say:so, with good life
And observation strange,my meaner ministers
Their several kinds havedone.
My high charms work
And these mine enemies areall knit up
In their distractions;they now are in my power.